Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Janet Morris has written seven science
fiction novels so far. These are grouped into two series, the Solistra series
and the Saga of the Carrion Empire. Morris' novels are characterized by strongly
developed characters and well-drawn backgrounds, and they feature hard science.
The Solistra series consists of four novels, High Couch of Solistra, The Golden
Sword, Wind from the Abyss, and The Carnelian Throne. The protagonist of the
series is Estri, the courtesan who gradually learns more about her real identity
and the power she has inherited. The series, still incomplete, chronicles
Estri's awakening. We asked Morris what she was aiming at when she wrote the
series. I was actually trying to come to terms with the fact that logically and
mathematically I couldn't come to terms with the incidences of ESP that I
experienced in my own life. And some of the more tenuous philosophical
intuitions that I was having that I just couldn't state. There's no other way
really to state those concepts on one level. The relationship of mind to
probability, our connection to time, whether we indeed are co-creators in some
sense of the universe in which we're living and we're making a future in the
past at once. Sometimes in particle physics I begin to wonder if the universe
isn't just giving us whatever particle we choose to dream up. You know, it's
just as soon as we think it up, then it comes into being, because we seem to be
going further and further down, and every time we go down another level, I mean,
the quarks split up into little quarks, and it's endless. And a lot of times you
could come up with a good mathematical reason for something, then maybe the
universe is convinced and it produces it. I have no idea of whether that's going
to turn out to be what it is, but if indeed it is, if the anthropic principle is
anywhere near valid, that it is something like that happening, that we are, in a
sense, central to creation, which would be nice. I mean, it suits my egotism.
Morris had other aims in mind as well. On another level, I wanted to talk about
genetic predispositions, and very bright people have a particular problem with
both human relationships and sexuality, and I wanted to talk about that, because
no matter how intelligent and logical you are, at a certain point you have to
deal with what is your genetic conditioning, and you really get a snootful of it
in a sex act. I mean, a person who is intelligent and monitors what's happening
to them as they become aroused, really realizes that there is a different and
much more primingal person inside each of us. And I had, at that time, I had, at
that time, begun to despair of nurture having anything to do at all with human
behavior, thinking that it was almost everything we do seem to me at that point
in time to be genetically prompted. What Ed Wilson said, that the urge to
creativity might be inextricably linked to the desire to own and dominate, and
that's one of the central themes there. Morris' upbringing also influenced her
writing the series. I was sort of born post-liberated. I was the guy. I was the
oldest child, and I was very intelligent, and I was expected to do all the
things that any young man is supposed to do. So I had come to grips with being a
post-liberated female, and these people were trying to get to where I started
out in agony. These women's livers, not realizing what they were letting
themselves in for, I also wanted to talk about that. And the estuary persona is
a persona that is in no way less than wholly female, while being very
intelligent and reasonably comfortable with that talent. So I wanted to talk a
little. It was an injection at that time that I was putting into consciousness
to sort of inoculate people against extremes of the female liberation movement.
More on Janet Morris' Solicitor series on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. Mptonуст's presidents was no one that is in conjunction with the
film playing as a job, and but the difference between late 2012 and 1981
,ninth is the tech school canopy of she, and I'm stronger than 51-25. The 35-18
-14. Mnest of coaster with your friends' Solicitor series on Phoenix. Dxton a
harい, Facebook Ralph toma Cycle europa Skyomaxtel.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Janet Morris' four-volume Solistra series
has had a highly successful sales record. With this series, it's interesting to
know that although the books themselves are explicitly science fiction, they're
packaged as fantasy. Right. The covers in all four of the novels feature a
scantily clad, voluptuous woman holding a sword, a scene typical of countless
fantasy novels. And the spines of two of the novels actually say fantasy under
the publisher's colophon. We asked Morris why the novels appeared with these
covers. The difference in that particular case was that Frederick Poles, who was
my first editor and who knew what was science fiction, left. And the other, I
guess, operative difference was that at the point in time when they came out,
they could get a bigger print run if they called it fantasy. So it was an
editorial difference rather than a real difference. But those covers did not
help me, in the least, get those books to the kind of people that I thought
should be reading them.
Here Morris goes on to tell us her feelings about science fiction and fantasy. I
didn't realize, because I was never a fan in the sense of someone who was hooked
into the community, that there was this great dichotomy and hostility between
the science fiction people and the fantasy people, and that hardly anyone read
both. There was very, almost no converse between the two. And having an open
mind as part of science and dealing with unsolved problems and questions is just
as important as showing that you indeed do understand this or that particular
principle, which seems right now to be valid until next week. It turns out that,
well, it just was fudge factor. So I don't know if there's a difference for me,
unfortunately. Fantasy right now seems to be where the writers go that don't do
any homework and don't really understand either this world or the principles on
which fantasy was originally based, the Homeric tradition and a good sense of
history and honor and all those nice things that we don't talk about too much
anymore. And science fiction is where people write who at least have a
willingness to pay some lip service to a logical mind. Fantasy used to be a lot
better when most people were writing it. But right now, there's a lot of very
mediocre writers writing, you know, good and evil fantasy or warmed-over
Christian mythology, which is not, to me, what fantasy is about. I love Conan,
you know, original Howard stuff and all the real old stuff and Homer and Hesiod.
That, to me, is good fantasy. Science fiction, when it's good, is great.
The problem exists in science fiction in a different form where the young
writers who don't really have a good conceptual basis in science fiction use
what I call nuts and bolts, which is just data that they can get from
encyclopedias as their science and have a little trick ending in which some
scientific principle is invoked to resolve the plot. But for me, good science
fiction has the science as an integral part of the development of the story. And
you couldn't have the story without the scientific principle or the theoretical
questions that you're basing it on. In other words, if you can take the science
out of it and you've still got a story, then you shouldn't have science fiction.
It should be something else. TV. Something like that. But science fiction should
have almost the science or the theory or the world or whatever you want to call
it, the structure that you're making. It adds the central character. And that's
what it does. When it does it best, it frees the mind and allows people to come
away with lots of good questions that they can think about rather than providing
tad answers, which indeed have a very limited lifespan, as we've all seen. More
with Janet Morris on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science Fiction author Janet Morris' Saga
of the Carrion Empire is a trilogy comprising Dream Dancer, Cruiser Dreams, and
Earth Dreams. The time is the 23rd century. In the milieu is Earth and several
human-colonized planets and faraway star systems. The heroine is Shebot, a
teenager from Earth, which by this time has reverted to a medieval culture. The
trilogy describes her coming of age as a ward of the rulers of the human empire,
the Carrion family. The saga of the Carrion Empire is an exciting blend of
characterization, speculative physics, and political intrigue. We asked Morris
if she plotted the whole series in detail before she wrote it. I was going to do
three. I signed for them before I did them. Three was all there was going to be.
Three is all there is going to be. You know, unless something drastically
changes, then I see where it's someplace that I'd like to take it. I knew
exactly what I wanted to talk about the physics and the rest of it. I wanted to
create a female character that had all the flaws that Estre did not, that was
totally opposite. And to talk a little about politics, I come from a very
political background. My half-sister was Carter, a speechwriter on economic
policy. I know way too much about politics to suit me. And I wanted to talk a
little bit about politics and decision-making at higher levels and what indeed
happens to the people involved in it and the people affected by it who have no
control of it. And the nice stuff for me that balanced it off was a culture that
was comfortable with its technology growing into its technology, growing along
with its technology. And, I mean, for me, the cruisers were the main characters
there. I loved doing the cruiser sections, although they were very difficult at
times, to make it really seem as if they were cruisers. And, you know, one never
knows if one succeeds, but for me, they really were cruisers. Plus, I had the
whole of history to draw on. Instead of having a culture that had nothing to do
with us, I had a culture that had everything to do with us. There had been no
collapse, no World War III. Everything had proceeded apace and just gotten
worse. The problems with quantum mechanics hadn't been solved. The problems with
nothing else had been solved, and we were just sort of muddling along the way we
tend to do. And that, to me, was a lot of fun. But, as I said, I did the
partial, and it went to auction in two countries on the partial. And I was sold
it here in England at the same time. Had two editors. Trying to keep the volumes
consistent. You know, every editor has a different idea of what exactly they
want you to do, and they all want to mix in. It's very seldom you get an editor
that leaves you totally alone. It doesn't bother you at all about a book. And I
had to split the difference on one occasion between them, where one editor
wanted one section to be longer, and the other one wanted the same section to be
shorter, in the same, just the same 30 pages. And I think I ended up doing a
prologue, which seemed to satisfy them both. I think they forgot what they asked
me to do, but I had to do something super. So I had done that. So they were cold
-bloodedly meant to be exactly what they are. Morris told us that she wrote this
trilogy with the mature, literate, scientifically sophisticated reader in mind.
Apparently, her strategy worked. So I'd go to these conventions, and they'd all
raise their hands and say, yes, they want more science, and yes, they were ready
to work a little, and yes, they wanted to be challenged. And I said, okay, but
we don't. And I wrote a book in which I wrote to my ideal reader, didn't talk
down, didn't simplify it, did what I consider a good job of explaining
mathematics as poetry, and just let fly. And so far, the reaction to it's been
very good. As I told you, the first printing, it's been through two printings
before publication, Earth Dreams, and it's been doing very well. You get some
people that don't want to work, but I think there's enough story there to carry
them over the parts that they are not willing to try to understand. More with
Janet Morris on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. The Science
Fiction Radio Show,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Science fiction author Janet Morris has
written the Solistra series and the saga of the Carrion Empire. Her novels are
of high quality, and when one reads them, it's apparent she's done her homework
on all facets of the novels. The characters, the science, the background,
everything. We wondered if Morris uses feedback from her fans. We asked her
initially if she goes to science fiction conventions. Her answer reveals a lot
about how a writer approaches her work. I used to go to more conventions than I
do now. One, because I've been doing books out of genre. I don't go a lot. And
my research, when I'm researching, takes up a tremendous amount of time. Two,
because I'm just, on one hand, I'm arrogant and I like to control things. On the
other hand, I'm very sensitive and I can always manage to get offended at
something somebody says. I was guest of honor at Carracon last year. I did that
one. And I'm going to do Lunacon in March because I really like that New York
crowd. Otherwise, I mean, my writing schedule is very heavy. I've got, I just
turned in a book. I just started a book, which is doing just about the amount of
time I have to finish it. I don't have a lot of extra time to do more than the
work that I'm doing. I'm real conscientious on my homework. And a lot of times
there's, you can never know enough about the subjects that you're writing about.
And when you're creating a whole world, you find there's something that you need
to know that you haven't. I mean, physics alone will not get you through a
science fiction novel, nor will any other specialty, not biology. There's no
single thing you can do that's going to allow you to create an entire culture
and change it. It's not just creating the culture. You've got to be able to
create it and change it. So the homework really takes a tremendous amount of
effort. And it's nice to do a fantasy book now almost as a break or a pay
vacation because that homework I did years ago. And I remember all the things I
need to know to do that. I think I have like three books on my desk. Heraclitus
Cacchus, Fragments, one on Asian fighting styles, and a classical dictionary
from Oxford. And that is all I need rather than, you know, three shelves and the
stool and a pile on the floor of stuff that I have to be able to refer to all
the time.
So cons, the kind of feedback you get at cons isn't as good as I get feedback
through letters, but sales figures and letters are really the way. And also, you
know, there are readers around here. I do some, you know, I do book signings and
I do small things where I can control it a little better than I can at the real
big, I mean, I'll do a world con or I went to England for C-Con. I do one or two
a year, but it's really all the time that I want to give it. It takes me about a
week. It's a different person that has to go to a con. My writer is too open. So
I had to create this other person, my author, and the author goes to the cons.
And it takes me about a week to get rid of this author afterwards because when
you sit at that typewriter, there's no room for you, the writer. You have to
erase yourself so that the characters can be there and the story can come. And
if I'm self-conscious or somebody has said something to me about there being too
much science or not enough science or that my books are fantasators to get
really upset with those fantasy labels, I'm liable to take it too much to heart
and to react to it on paper and do something to my story, which I don't want to
happen because it's something that's happened. I just got a real good review in
the New York Daily News and I hate the good ones as much as I hate the bad ones.
They never like them for the right reasons. So the best thing really is just the
letters from people, you know, who read them three times and loved them or who
ask me intelligent questions, which I try to answer. More with Janet Morris on
our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science fiction author Janet Morris has
written seven novels so far. Both her series feature female protagonists who are
neither shrinking violets nor female versions of Conan the Barbarian or
Superman. Estry and Shebot are believable characters. They are women with both
strong points and weak points as are most human beings. Morris does not use them
to preach a particular point of view. Morris feels very strongly that women must
be willing to tackle the future head on, be willing to embrace and make use of
technological developments. In fact, she believes these developments will lessen
the importance of physical differences between the sexes. It's a problem for
females in the age that is coming, if indeed it continues to be the case,
because without good technical facility, good math willingness to deal with
computers, they're going to be dinosaurs. And the same instrument, one can be
equal at a computer if one masters the computer. There's a potential for real
equality, an intellectual equality, now that has never existed before, partly
because menial labor and physical strength is no longer a great part of what
makes one a functional human being in a society, and partly because of the
concerns of the society itself. It is not going to happen if women don't start
doing their own work in the areas involved and getting their facility up there.
And if I can do it, the rest of them can do it. There's no reason why anyone
should be in a self-inflicted ghetto.
I'd really like to see ladies spending more time trying to become premier in
their field the way a guy has to. I mean, it's a responsibility that one takes
on very early in life. I am going to be successful at something, specific
besides childbearing. Not that childbearing isn't a nice part of life, but there
definitely is more. Although Morris writes about competent female protagonists,
and she herself is obviously a very capable individual, she does not necessarily
go along with the feminist movement. People assume that I am a feminist, and I
really don't want to be associated with a bunch of ladies standing out in the
middle of the street screaming for their rights. It's just not me. I'm not
comfortable with them. I don't agree with them. I don't like oversimplification.
I don't believe that conditioning is a great part of what makes a person what
they are, that the fact that if you're a little girl and you don't have pockets
in your pants, you're doomed, it's just, I don't believe it. A great degree of
it is genetic inheritance, but one does have control over one's own fate.
Intelligence will go where you point it, and there are plenty of intelligent
women out there. I'd like to see them do something with that intelligence.
Morris is herself, an individual who aspires to achieve and to succeed. She
doesn't look externally for her identity. I've ended up on panels before I knew
better at conventions where I look around me and everyone else in that panel is
a woman, and someone has put me in a ghetto, and invariably they all write
fantasy or they all write very light science fiction, and nobody is writing the
sort of thing that I'm writing, and nobody is interested in talking about what
I'm interested in talking about. I was at one where the moderator said, oh,
isn't this wonderful? We're all ladies. We'll have a consciousness-raising
session, and I just about slid under the table. It's just not my style. It's not
what I'm interested in. It's not what I'm comfortable with, and I don't even
mind if large groups of females want to organize for their rights, although the
Constitution does not guarantee any right except the right to struggle to
succeed. Nobody's given you the right to have anything gratis in America just to
try to get it, but they're not speaking for me. Janet Morris is an outstanding
writer who made her appearance in the late 1970s. The care she puts into her
characters into the science in her science fiction makes her books well worth
reading.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Nobody's given you the same problem, And I'm hoping you'll see and I'llerk
youcomb
in order for theirleiche continues. And press the editing book And when
they'reićying back, Thank you.